README.md, before:

# Nomos
## Resource-Aware Session Types for Digital Contracts
This repository contains an implementation of Nomos, a programming language for smart contracts based on resource-aware session types.

## Installation

### Prerequisites

#### Opam
The instructions for installing opam are available on the [opam installation page](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html). Please install the latest version of opam.

##### Configuring Opam
To configure opam for the first time and install the latest version of OCaml, please run the following (skip if you have already configured opam)
```
$ opam init
```

### OCaml Version
Please make sure you have ocaml version `4.10.0` or higher. To install this version, simply run the following command.
```
$ opam switch create 4.10.0
```

### Installing Dependencies
Clone the repository and obtain the source code, and install the necessary libraries to build.
```
$ git clone https://github.com/ankushdas/Nomos.git
$ cd Nomos/nomos
```
The next step is installing the [Coin-Or LP solver](https://projects.coin-or.org/Clp). Use the instructions below.
```
$ cd clp
$ svn co https://projects.coin-or.org/svn/Clp/stable/1.16 coin-Clp
$ cd coin-Clp
$ ./configure -C
$ make
$ make test
$ make install
$ cd ../..
```
The next step is setting up the environment variable `CLP_PATH` to the directory where the Coin-Or LP solver is installed. Use the command below.
```
$ export CLP_PATH=<absolute-path-to-'coin-Clp'-folder>
```

Now, we need to build and install Nomos.
```
$ opam update
$ opam pin add -y nomos .         # only the first time you build
$ opam upgrade                    # after packages upgrade
```

### Building
Simply run the make command at the top-level.
```
$ make
```

### Troubleshooting
1. Sometimes, your `$ make` command may fail with the error "dune: command not found". In this case, try restarting your terminal and running `$ make` again. Or you may need to run `$ eval $(opam config env)` in your terminal unless this command is already in your `.bashrc`.

2. Sometimes, the core library of ocaml is not correctly installed (generally, if you already have an old installation of core). In these cases, simply run `$ opam install core` and try running `$ make` again.

3. On Linux machines, you may need to provide the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` as well. This can be achieved by the following command.
```
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=<absolute-path-to-'coin-Clp'-folder>/lib
```

4. Sometimes, `$ opam upgrade` can fail with the following error particularly on Linux machines.
```
The packages you requested declare the following system dependencies. Please
make sure they are installed before retrying:
    m4
```
Please make sure you install `m4`. On Ubuntu machines, this simply amounts to running the command `$ sudo apt install m4`.

### Testing
To test whether your installation works, here are a few sample smart contract transactions you can test.
Let's first create a gas account using the following command.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts <any-name> -create -o s1.conf
```
The flag `-w send` indicates that the type checker should use the `send` cost model that assigns
a gas cost of 1 to every compute operation and sending a message. (This does not matter yet, but will
matter when we execute a transaction.)
The `-ts` flag indicates the transaction sender. You can use any name here. I am choosing the name `ankush`.
The `-create` flag indicates that the transaction sender wishes to create a new account.
Finally, the `-o s1.conf` indicates that the output configuration should be stored in a local file called `s1.conf`.
After execution, you should see the following output.
```
% account creation of ankush successful!
```
Next, let us deposit some gas units into the account just created.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -deposit 1000 -i s1.conf -o s2.conf
```
The `-deposit 1000` flag denotes that 1000 gas units be deposited into the sender's account. In a real
blockchain environment, a user would need to pay real money here!
At this time, we want to use the input configuration `s1.conf` as indicated by the flag `-i s1.conf`.
The new configuration is stored in `s2.conf`.
You should see the following output.
```
% deposit of 1000 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 1000
```
The fun really begins here! Run the following command to execute a transaction that creates a wallet with 1000 coins.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s2.conf -o s3.conf nomos-tests/wallet/create-wallet-t1.nom
```
You should see the following output.
```
% gas cost of txn: 108 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 892 gas units
created a wallet with 1000 coins on channel #ch3[S]
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 100 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 992
% runtime successful!
```
Next, we create another wallet with 100 coins in it.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s3.conf -o s4.conf nomos-tests/wallet/create-wallet-t2.nom
```
The output of this transaction should be
```
% gas cost of txn: 108 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 884 gas units
created a wallet with 100 coins on channel #ch7[S]
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 100 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 984
% runtime successful!
```
Finally, we run a simple transaction that transfers 100 coins from the first wallet to the second.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s4.conf -o s5.conf nomos-tests/wallet/transfer-t3.nom
```
The output at the end should be
```
% gas cost of txn: 48 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 936 gas units
transfer of 100 coins from #ch3[S] to #ch7[S] successful
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 0 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 936
% runtime successful!
```
And, for good measure, we have one last transaction to print the new balances of both the wallets.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s5.conf -o s6.conf nomos-tests/wallet/print-balance-t4.nom
```
The output at the end should be
```
% gas cost of txn: 43 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 893 gas units
The balance of #ch3[S] is 900
The balance of #ch7[S] is 200
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 0 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 893
% runtime successful!
```
Nomos automatically calculates the gas cost of each transaction and subtracts the amount from the sender's
account! After these 4 transactions, the gas balance of `ankush` is 893.

### Executing
The make command creates an executable for Nomos at `_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe`.
To typecheck a file with Nomos, run
```
$ _build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -tc <file-path>
```
The `-tc` flag tells Nomos to only typecheck the target file. It ignores any `exec` statements.

You can also omit `-tc` to run the `exec` statements.

A configuration is a description of the state of the all contracts we have running at a specific time. When we run a
transaction, the configuration is perturbed but will reach final state, which is where execution stops until the next
transaction is run.
You can run transactions on a specific configuration using the -i flag and can save the resulting configuration with
the -o flag. If you don't use the -i flag, your transaction will be run on an empty configuration.
You must specify the sender of the transaction using the -ts flag.

For example,
```
$ _build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -ts someone -o s1.conf some_transaction.nom
$ _build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -ts someone -i s1.conf -o s2.conf another_transaction.nom
```

### Top Level
It's also possible to parse, typecheck, and interpret Nomos files and transactions from the OCaml interpreter.

First, load the interpreter using `dune utop`.

Now we can try out some transactions interactively:
```
utop [0]: load_and_exec "nomos-tests/test-wallet/t1.nom";;
....
exec main1
created a wallet with 1000 coins on channel #ch3[S]
- : unit = ()
utop [1]: load_and_exec "nomos-tests/test-wallet/t2.nom";;
...
exec main2
created a wallet with 100 coins on channel #ch7[S]
- : unit = ()
utop [3]: load_and_exec "nomos-tests/test-wallet/t3.nom";;
...
exec main3
transfer of 100 coins from #ch3[S] to #ch7[S] successful
- : unit = () 
utop [4]: save "final.conf";;
- : unit = ()
```
This saves the final configuration after running t1, t2, and t3 to final.conf.

For a complete listing of available commands at the top level, see `nomos-src/TopLevel.mli`.


## Writing Nomos programs
Writing session-typed programs needs some guidance. First, I will introduce the basic declarations. There are three forms of declarations:

#### Type Definitions
New type names can be defined using the following syntax `type v = A` where type name `v` has definition `A`. As an example, the `auction` type is defined as follows:
```
type auction = /\ <{*}| +{running : &{bid : int -> money -o |{*}> \/ auction,
                                      cancel : |{*}> \/ auction},
                          ended : &{collect : int -> +{won : lot * |{*}> \/ auction,
                                                       lost : money * |{*}> \/ auction},
                                    cancel : |{*}> \/ auction}}
```
Here, `/\` and `\/` are used to denote up-shift and down-shift, `<{q}|` and `|{q}>` are used to receive and send potential resp., `->` and `^` are used to receive and send functional data, `-o` and `*` are used to receive and send channels, `+` and `&` denote internal and external choice, and `1` indicates termination. Note that `*` can be used in place of `q` to denote unknown potential, which is later inferred by the compiler.

Formally, the grammar for session types is as follows:
```
<A> ::= +{l1 : <A1>, ..., ln : <An>}       // internal choice
      | &{l1 : <A1>, ..., ln : <An>}       // external choice
      | <A> * <A>                          // tensor
      | <A> -o <A>                         // lolli
      | 1                                  // one
      | |{q}> <A>                          // paypot (send q units of potential, continue with A)
      | <{q}| <A>                          // getpot (receive q units of potential, continue with A)
      | /\ <A>                             // up (linear to shared)
      | \/ <A>                             // down (shared to linear)
      | <t> ^ <A>                          // send functional value of type t
      | <t> -> <A>                         // receive functional value of type t
      | <id>                               // type name (e.g. auction)
      | ( <A> )
    
<t> ::= int           // integer
      | bool          // boolean
      | address       // built-in address type (internally a string)
      | <t> list{q}   // list of type t with potential q
      | <t> -> <t>    // arrow type
      | ( t )

<q> ::= *           // unknown potential
      | n           // positive integer
```

#### Process Definitions
New processes are defined using the syntax `proc <mode> f : (x1 : t1), (x2 : t2), ..., (xn : tn), ($c1 : A1), ... ($cm : Am) |{q}- ($c : A) = M` where the process name is `f`, its context is a sequence of functional arguments `xi` with types `Ai` and channel arguments `$ci` (shared channels are denoted by `#ci`) of type `Ai`, the potential stored is `q`, and the offered channel is `x` of type `A`. The definition is denoted by the expression `P`. An empty context is described using `.`. The `mode` can be either `asset`, `contract` or `transaction` depending on the role of the process.

Formally, the context is denoted with
```
<context> ::= .     // empty context
            | ctx   // non-empty context  

<ctx> ::= ($x : <A>), ctx
        | (#x : <A>), ctx
        | (x : <t>), ctx
```


#### Process Execution
A process `f` can be executed using the syntax `exec f`. Note that since Nomos only allows closed processes to execute, I require that `f` is defined with an empty context (this is checked by the type checker).

### Process Syntax
The channels in Nomos are prefixed with either a `#` or `$` character. Thus, shared channel `c` is denoted using `#c` while linear channel `c` is denoted using `$c`. This is required to visually separate functional variables from session-typed channels.

Formally, the syntax for processes is below.
```
M ::= { P }               // session-typed monad

<ch> ::= #<id> | $<id>   // channel
<ch-list> ::= <ch> | <ch> <ch-list>

<P> ::= <ch> <- f <- <ch-list> ; <P>    // spawn process f
      | <ch> <- f <- <ch-list>          // tail call f
      | <ch> <- <ch>                    // forwarding
      | send <ch1> <ch2> ; <P>          // send ch2 on ch1
      | <ch2> <- recv <ch1> ; <P>       // receive ch2 on ch1
      | <ch>.k ; <P>                    // send label k on ch
      | case <ch> ( <branches> )        // case analyze on label received on <ch>
      | close <ch>                      // close channel <ch>
      | wait <ch> ; <P>                 // wait for <ch> to close
      | work {q} ; <P>                  // work q units
      | pay <ch> {q} ; <P>              // pay q units on <ch>
      | get <ch> {q} ; <P>              // get q units on <ch>
      | <ch> <- acquire <ch> ; <P>      // acquire channel
      | <ch> <- accept <ch> ; <P>       // accept acquire request
      | <ch> <- release <ch> ; <P>      // release channel
      | <ch> <- detach <ch> ; <P>       // detach from release requ
      | send <ch> <e> ; <P>             // send functional expression e
      | <id> = recv <ch> ; <P>          // receive functional value
      | let <id> = <e> ; <P>            // define new variable
      | if <e> then <P> else <P>        // if expression

<e> ::= n | true | false                // primitive values
      | <id>                            // variable
      | if <e> then <e> else <e>        // if expression
      | let <id> = <e> in <e>           // let expression
      | <e> <op> <e>                    // boolean, comparison and arithmetic operations
```

Commit message:

Readme updated with latest CLP instructions

README.md, after:

# Nomos
## Resource-Aware Session Types for Digital Contracts
This repository contains an implementation of Nomos, a programming language for smart contracts based on resource-aware session types.

## Installation

### Prerequisites

#### Opam
The instructions for installing opam are available on the [opam installation page](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html). Please install the latest version of opam.

##### Configuring Opam
To configure opam for the first time and install a specific version of OCaml, please run the following (skip if you have already configured opam)
```
$ opam init
```

### OCaml Version
Please make sure you have ocaml version `4.10.0`. To install this version, simply run the following command.
```
$ opam switch create 4.10.0
```

### Installing Dependencies
Clone the repository and obtain the source code, and install the necessary libraries to build.
```
$ git clone https://github.com/ankushdas/Nomos.git
$ cd Nomos/nomos
```
The next step is installing the [Coin-Or LP solver](https://projects.coin-or.org/Clp). Use the instructions below.
```
$ cd clp
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/coin-or/coinbrew/master/coinbrew
$ chmod u+x coinbrew
$ ./coinbrew fetch Clp@master
$ ./coinbrew build Clp
```
The next step is setting up the environment variable `CLP_PATH` to the directory where the Coin-Or LP solver is installed. Use the command below.
```
$ export CLP_PATH=<absolute-path-to-'Clp'-folder>
```
If you followed the instructions below, it will be the following folder
```
$ export CLP_PATH=<absolute-path-to-'Nomos'-folder>/nomos/clp/dist
```

Now, we need to build and install Nomos.
```
$ opam update
$ opam pin add -y nomos .         # only the first time you build
$ opam upgrade                    # after packages upgrade
```

### Building
Simply run the make command at the top-level.
```
$ make
```

### Troubleshooting
1. Sometimes, your `$ make` command may fail with the error "dune: command not found". In this case, try restarting your terminal and running `$ make` again. Or you may need to run `$ eval $(opam config env)` in your terminal unless this command is already in your `.bashrc`.

2. Sometimes, the core library of ocaml is not correctly installed (generally, if you already have an old installation of core). In these cases, simply run `$ opam install core` and try running `$ make` again.

3. On Linux machines, you may need to provide the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` as well. This can be achieved by the following command.
```
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=<absolute-path-to-'coin-Clp'-folder>/lib
```

4. Sometimes, `$ opam upgrade` can fail with the following error particularly on Linux machines.
```
The packages you requested declare the following system dependencies. Please
make sure they are installed before retrying:
    m4
```
Please make sure you install `m4`. On Ubuntu machines, this simply amounts to running the command `$ sudo apt install m4`.

### Testing
To test whether your installation works, here are a few sample smart contract transactions you can test.
Let's first create a gas account using the following command.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts <any-name> -create -o s1.conf
```
The flag `-w send` indicates that the type checker should use the `send` cost model that assigns
a gas cost of 1 to every compute operation and sending a message. (This does not matter yet, but will
matter when we execute a transaction.)
The `-ts` flag indicates the transaction sender. You can use any name here. I am choosing the name `ankush`.
The `-create` flag indicates that the transaction sender wishes to create a new account.
Finally, the `-o s1.conf` indicates that the output configuration should be stored in a local file called `s1.conf`.
After execution, you should see the following output.
```
% account creation of ankush successful!
```
Next, let us deposit some gas units into the account just created.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -deposit 1000 -i s1.conf -o s2.conf
```
The `-deposit 1000` flag denotes that 1000 gas units be deposited into the sender's account. In a real
blockchain environment, a user would need to pay real money here!
At this time, we want to use the input configuration `s1.conf` as indicated by the flag `-i s1.conf`.
The new configuration is stored in `s2.conf`.
You should see the following output.
```
% deposit of 1000 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 1000
```
The fun really begins here! Run the following command to execute a transaction that creates a wallet with 1000 coins.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s2.conf -o s3.conf nomos-tests/wallet/create-wallet-t1.nom
```
You should see the following output.
```
% gas cost of txn: 108 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 892 gas units
created a wallet with 1000 coins on channel #ch3[S]
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 100 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 992
% runtime successful!
```
Next, we create another wallet with 100 coins in it.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s3.conf -o s4.conf nomos-tests/wallet/create-wallet-t2.nom
```
The output of this transaction should be
```
% gas cost of txn: 108 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 884 gas units
created a wallet with 100 coins on channel #ch7[S]
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 100 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 984
% runtime successful!
```
Finally, we run a simple transaction that transfers 100 coins from the first wallet to the second.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s4.conf -o s5.conf nomos-tests/wallet/transfer-t3.nom
```
The output at the end should be
```
% gas cost of txn: 48 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 936 gas units
transfer of 100 coins from #ch3[S] to #ch7[S] successful
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 0 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 936
% runtime successful!
```
And, for good measure, we have one last transaction to print the new balances of both the wallets.
```
./_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -w send -ts ankush -i s5.conf -o s6.conf nomos-tests/wallet/print-balance-t4.nom
```
The output at the end should be
```
% gas cost of txn: 43 units successfully deducted; txn sender ankush now has 893 gas units
The balance of #ch3[S] is 900
The balance of #ch7[S] is 200
% depositing leftover gas
% deposit of 0 gas units successful!
% account balance of ankush: 893
% runtime successful!
```
Nomos automatically calculates the gas cost of each transaction and subtracts the amount from the sender's
account! After these 4 transactions, the gas balance of `ankush` is 893.

### Executing
The make command creates an executable for Nomos at `_build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe`.
To typecheck a file with Nomos, run
```
$ _build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -tc <file-path>
```
The `-tc` flag tells Nomos to only typecheck the target file. It ignores any `exec` statements.

You can also omit `-tc` to run the `exec` statements.

A configuration is a description of the state of the all contracts we have running at a specific time. When we run a
transaction, the configuration is perturbed but will reach final state, which is where execution stops until the next
transaction is run.
You can run transactions on a specific configuration using the -i flag and can save the resulting configuration with
the -o flag. If you don't use the -i flag, your transaction will be run on an empty configuration.
You must specify the sender of the transaction using the -ts flag.

For example,
```
$ _build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -ts someone -o s1.conf some_transaction.nom
$ _build/default/nomos-bin/nomos.exe -ts someone -i s1.conf -o s2.conf another_transaction.nom
```

### Top Level
It's also possible to parse, typecheck, and interpret Nomos files and transactions from the OCaml interpreter.

First, load the interpreter using `dune utop`.

Now we can try out some transactions interactively:
```
utop [0]: load_and_exec "nomos-tests/test-wallet/t1.nom";;
....
exec main1
created a wallet with 1000 coins on channel #ch3[S]
- : unit = ()
utop [1]: load_and_exec "nomos-tests/test-wallet/t2.nom";;
...
exec main2
created a wallet with 100 coins on channel #ch7[S]
- : unit = ()
utop [3]: load_and_exec "nomos-tests/test-wallet/t3.nom";;
...
exec main3
transfer of 100 coins from #ch3[S] to #ch7[S] successful
- : unit = () 
utop [4]: save "final.conf";;
- : unit = ()
```
This saves the final configuration after running t1, t2, and t3 to final.conf.

For a complete listing of available commands at the top level, see `nomos-src/TopLevel.mli`.


## Writing Nomos programs
Writing session-typed programs needs some guidance. First, I will introduce the basic declarations. There are three forms of declarations:

#### Type Definitions
New type names can be defined using the following syntax `type v = A` where type name `v` has definition `A`. As an example, the `auction` type is defined as follows:
```
type auction = /\ <{*}| +{running : &{bid : int -> money -o |{*}> \/ auction,
                                      cancel : |{*}> \/ auction},
                          ended : &{collect : int -> +{won : lot * |{*}> \/ auction,
                                                       lost : money * |{*}> \/ auction},
                                    cancel : |{*}> \/ auction}}
```
Here, `/\` and `\/` are used to denote up-shift and down-shift, `<{q}|` and `|{q}>` are used to receive and send potential resp., `->` and `^` are used to receive and send functional data, `-o` and `*` are used to receive and send channels, `+` and `&` denote internal and external choice, and `1` indicates termination. Note that `*` can be used in place of `q` to denote unknown potential, which is later inferred by the compiler.

Formally, the grammar for session types is as follows:
```
<A> ::= +{l1 : <A1>, ..., ln : <An>}       // internal choice
      | &{l1 : <A1>, ..., ln : <An>}       // external choice
      | <A> * <A>                          // tensor
      | <A> -o <A>                         // lolli
      | 1                                  // one
      | |{q}> <A>                          // paypot (send q units of potential, continue with A)
      | <{q}| <A>                          // getpot (receive q units of potential, continue with A)
      | /\ <A>                             // up (linear to shared)
      | \/ <A>                             // down (shared to linear)
      | <t> ^ <A>                          // send functional value of type t
      | <t> -> <A>                         // receive functional value of type t
      | <id>                               // type name (e.g. auction)
      | ( <A> )
    
<t> ::= int           // integer
      | bool          // boolean
      | address       // built-in address type (internally a string)
      | <t> list{q}   // list of type t with potential q
      | <t> -> <t>    // arrow type
      | ( t )

<q> ::= *           // unknown potential
      | n           // positive integer
```

#### Process Definitions
New processes are defined using the syntax `proc <mode> f : (x1 : t1), (x2 : t2), ..., (xn : tn), ($c1 : A1), ... ($cm : Am) |{q}- ($c : A) = M` where the process name is `f`, its context is a sequence of functional arguments `xi` with types `Ai` and channel arguments `$ci` (shared channels are denoted by `#ci`) of type `Ai`, the potential stored is `q`, and the offered channel is `x` of type `A`. The definition is denoted by the expression `P`. An empty context is described using `.`. The `mode` can be either `asset`, `contract` or `transaction` depending on the role of the process.

Formally, the context is denoted with
```
<context> ::= .     // empty context
            | ctx   // non-empty context  

<ctx> ::= ($x : <A>), ctx
        | (#x : <A>), ctx
        | (x : <t>), ctx
```


#### Process Execution
A process `f` can be executed using the syntax `exec f`. Note that since Nomos only allows closed processes to execute, I require that `f` is defined with an empty context (this is checked by the type checker).

### Process Syntax
The channels in Nomos are prefixed with either a `#` or `$` character. Thus, shared channel `c` is denoted using `#c` while linear channel `c` is denoted using `$c`. This is required to visually separate functional variables from session-typed channels.

Formally, the syntax for processes is below.
```
M ::= { P }               // session-typed monad

<ch> ::= #<id> | $<id>   // channel
<ch-list> ::= <ch> | <ch> <ch-list>

<P> ::= <ch> <- f <- <ch-list> ; <P>    // spawn process f
      | <ch> <- f <- <ch-list>          // tail call f
      | <ch> <- <ch>                    // forwarding
      | send <ch1> <ch2> ; <P>          // send ch2 on ch1
      | <ch2> <- recv <ch1> ; <P>       // receive ch2 on ch1
      | <ch>.k ; <P>                    // send label k on ch
      | case <ch> ( <branches> )        // case analyze on label received on <ch>
      | close <ch>                      // close channel <ch>
      | wait <ch> ; <P>                 // wait for <ch> to close
      | work {q} ; <P>                  // work q units
      | pay <ch> {q} ; <P>              // pay q units on <ch>
      | get <ch> {q} ; <P>              // get q units on <ch>
      | <ch> <- acquire <ch> ; <P>      // acquire channel
      | <ch> <- accept <ch> ; <P>       // accept acquire request
      | <ch> <- release <ch> ; <P>      // release channel
      | <ch> <- detach <ch> ; <P>       // detach from release requ
      | send <ch> <e> ; <P>             // send functional expression e
      | <id> = recv <ch> ; <P>          // receive functional value
      | let <id> = <e> ; <P>            // define new variable
      | if <e> then <P> else <P>        // if expression

<e> ::= n | true | false                // primitive values
      | <id>                            // variable
      | if <e> then <e> else <e>        // if expression
      | let <id> = <e> in <e>           // let expression
      | <e> <op> <e>                    // boolean, comparison and arithmetic operations
```
